📖 In place propagation of changes affecting Kubernetes objects only (#7331)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api: docs/proposals/20221003-In-place-propagation-of-Kubernetes-objects-only-changes.md

In order to prevent unnecessary rollouts, the above propagation should happen in place (see [in place propagation](#in-place-propagation));
same considerations apply to metadata propagation from MachineSet to machines.

#### In Place Metadata propagation from KubeadmControlPlane to Machines

In order to prevent unnecessary rollouts, metadata propagation from KubeadmControlPlane to Machines should happen in place (see [in place propagation](#in-place-propagation)).

#### Label Sync Between Machine and underlying Kubernetes Nodes

As discussed in [Label Sync Between Machine and underlying Kubernetes Nodes](link to the proposal as soon as it merge) we are propagating from
the Machine to corresponding Kubernetes Node only labels with a well known prefix or a well known domain.

### Propagation of fields impacting only Kubernetes objects or controller behaviour

Apart from labels and annotations, there are also other fields that flow downs from ClusterClass to KubeadmControlPlane/MachineDeployments and
ultimately to Machines.

Some of them can be considered like labels and annotations, because they have impacts only only Kubernetes objects or controller behaviour, but

> not on the Machine itself. Examples are `MinReadySeconds`, `NodeDrainTimeout`, `NodeVolumeDetachTimeout`, `NodeDeletionTimeout`.

Reviewer: Machine here as written = kubernetes CR. I think you are referring to the provider instance which remains immutable

Author: I will clarify this, good catch

Propagation of changes to those fields will be implementated using the same [in place propagation](#in-place-propagation) mechanism implemented
for metatada .

### In place propagation

With in place propagation we are referring to a mechanism that updates existing Kuberentes objects, like MachineSets or Machines, instead of
creating a new instance with the updated info and deleting the current Kubernetes object.

The main benefits of this approach is that it prevents unnecessary rollouts of the corresponding infrastructure, with the consequent creation/
deletion of a Kubernetes node and drain/scheduling ofworkloads hosted on the machine being deleted.

> **Important!** in place propagation of changes as defined above applies only to metadata changes or to fields impacting only Kubernetes objects

Reviewer: may be we should agree on a name for this definition and add it to the glossary so we refer to the fields that qualify consistently. E.g

Elastic fields: Fields which changes would only impact Kubernetes objects or/and controller behaviour but they won't mutate in any way provider infrastructure nor the software running on it. Elastic fields are propagated in place by CAPI controllers to avoid the more elaborated mechanics of a replace rollout. These includes metadata, MinReadySeconds, NodeDrainTimeout, NodeVolumeDetachTimeout and NodeDeletionTimeout but are not limited to be expanded in the future.

Author: I'm +1 to add a definition to the glossary, let's see if we can find consensus on the name/definition

Reviewer 2: Definitely a good idea to define this and then just use it going forward. 

I'm fine with the definition, not sure about the name.

But I don't have a good idea, maybe "In-place mutable fields" would be very very explicit

Author: added definition to the glossary in the proposal and to the glossary in the book

  fields impacting only Kubernetes objects or controller behaviour).

### Future-Goals

- Expand propagation rules including MachinePools after the [MachinePools Machine proposal]() is implemented.

## Proposal

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As a cluster admin/user, I would like a declarative and secure means by which to assign roles to my nodes by acting on Cluster.Topology metadata
(for Clusters with ClusterClass).

As a cluster admin/user, I would like a declarative and secure means by which to assign roles to my nodes by acting on KubeadmControlPlane
MachineDeployments (for Clusters without ClusterClass).

#### Story 2

As a cluster admin/user, I would like to change labels or annotations on Machines without triggering Machine rollout.

#### Story 3

As a cluster admin/user, I would like to change nodeDrainTimeout on Machines without triggering Machine rollout.

#### Story 4

As a cluster admin/user, I would like to set autoscaler labels for MachineDeployments by changing Cluster.Topology metadata
(for Clusters with ClusterClass).

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

> ### Metadata propagation

Author: Thank you

The following schema represent how metadata propagation works today (also documented in [book](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/developer/architecture/controllers/metadata-propagation.html)).

![Figure 1](./images/in-place-propagation/current-state.png)

With this proposal we are suggesting to improve metadata propagation according as described in the following schema:

![Figure 2](./images/in-place-propagation/proposed-changes.png)

Following paragraphs provide more details about the proposed changes.

#### Propagation of metadata from ClusterClass and Cluster Topology

This change ensure that metadata from ClusterClass and Cluster Topology propagate consistently, in the sense that each set of labels and
annotations will be applied in the same way to all the corresponding targets, more specifically:

1. Metadata from ClusterClass.Spec.ControlPlane and Cluster.Spec.Topology.ControlPlane apply consistently to:
- The ControlPlane object, e.g. KubeadmControlPlane (both top level metadata and spec.machineTemplate.metadata).

> - The InfrastructureMachineTemplate object eventually referenced by the ControlPlane (top level metadata only).

Author: fixed (uploaded wrong image 😅)

> - The InfrastructureMachineTemplate object eventually referenced by the ControlPlane (top level metadata only).

Author: updating diagrams

2. Metadata from ClusterClass.Spec.Workers.MachineDeployments and Cluster.Spec.Workers.Topology.ControlPlane apply consistently to:
- The MachineDeployment objects (both top level metadata and spec.template.metadata).
- The InfrastructureMachineTemplate object referenced by the MachineDeployment (top level metadata only).

> - The BottstrapTemplate object referenced by the MachineDeployment (top level metadata only).

Author: fixed (uploaded wrong image 😅)

> - The BottstrapTemplate object referenced by the MachineDeployment (top level metadata only).

Author: updating diagrams

Please note that above changes solves [Labels and annotations for MachineDeployments and KubeadmControlPlane created by topology controller](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/7006);
also, we are stopping to propagate existing labels on ClusterClass templates to objects created from them in favor of always

> propagating the same set of labels as described above.

Author: That's a great catch, I have missed because it was not documented in https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/developer/architecture/controllers/metadata-propagation.html; updating diagram accordingly

> propagating the same set of labels as described above.

Author: I have updated diagrams with metadata propagation from templates, dropping this point while we identify next steps on the improved picture

Note: as of today topology controllers already propagates ClusterClass and Cluster Topology metadata changes in place when possible
in order to avoid unnecessary template rotation with the consequent Machine rollout; we do not foresee changes to this logic
in order to support above propagation rules.

#### Simplified Metadata propagation from MachineDeployment to MachineSet

We are going to drop current behaviour inherited from Kubernetes's Deployment controller, that computes top level labels in MachineSet

> using a different source from the one used for annotations. Instead we propose a more straight forward propagation:

Author: not a goal anymore

---

title: In place propagation of changes affecting Kubernetes objects only
authors:
- "@fabriziopandini"
- @sbueringer
reviewers:
- @oscar
- @vincepri

>   creation-date: 2022-02-10
>   last-updated: 2022-02-26
>   status: implementable
>   replaces:
>   superseded-by:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
creation-date: 2022-02-10
last-updated: 2022-02-26
status: implementable
replaces:
superseded-by:
```

but they won't mutate in any way provider infrastructure nor the software running on it. In-place mutable fields
are propagated in place by CAPI controllers to avoid the more elaborated mechanics of a replace rollout.
These includes metadata, MinReadySeconds, NodeDrainTimeout, NodeVolumeDetachTimeout and NodeDeletionTimeout but are
not limited to be expanded in the future.

## Summary

This document discusses how labels, annotation and other fields impacting only Kubernetes objects or controller behaviour (e.g NodeDrainTimeout)
propagate from ClusterClass to KubeadmControlPlane/MachineDeployments and ultimately to Machines.

## Motivation

Managing labels on Kubernetes nodes has been a long standing [issue](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/493) in Cluster API.

The following challenges have been identified through various iterations:

- Define how labels propagate from Machine to Node.
- Define how labels and annotations propagate from ClusterClass to KubeadmControlPlane/MachineDeployments and ultimately to Machines.
- Define how to prevent that label and annotation propagation triggers unnecessary rollouts.

> The first point is being addressed by [Label Sync Between Machine and underlying Kubernetes Nodes](./20220927-label-sync-between-machine-and-nodes.md),

Reviewer 3: This is a broken link, is there an open proposal with this doc?

Reviewer 2: Should be fixed after rebase

Reviewer 2: Works now

while this document tackles the remaining two points.

During a preliminary exploration we identified that the two above challenges apply also to other fields impacting only Kubernetes objects or
controller behaviour (see e.g. [Support to propagate properties in-place from MachineDeployments to Machines](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/5880)).

As a consequence we have decided to expand this work to consider how to propagate labels, annotations and fields impacting only Kubernetes objects or
controller behaviour, as well as this related issue: [Labels and annotations for MachineDeployments and KubeadmControlPlane created by topology controller](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/7006).

### Goals

- Define how labels and annotations propagate from ClusterClass to KubeadmControlPlane/MachineDeployments and ultimately to Machines.
- Define how fields impacting only Kubernetes objects or controller behaviour propagate from ClusterClass to KubeadmControlPlane
  MachineDeployments, and ultimately to Machines.
- Define how to prevent that propagation of labels, annotations and other fields impacting only Kubernetes objects or controller behaviour

>   trigger unnecessary rollouts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  triggers unnecessary rollouts.
```

(for Clusters with ClusterClass).

As a cluster admin/user, I would like a declarative and secure means by which to assign roles to my nodes via KubeadmControlPlane and
MachineDeployments (for Clusters without ClusterClass).

#### Story 2

As a cluster admin/user, I would like to change labels or annotations on Machines without triggering Machine rollouts.

#### Story 3

As a cluster admin/user, I would like to change nodeDrainTimeout on Machines without triggering Machine rollouts.

#### Story 4

As a cluster admin/user, I would like to set autoscaler labels for MachineDeployments by changing Cluster topology metadata
(for Clusters with ClusterClass).

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

### Metadata propagation

The following schema represent how metadata propagation works today (also documented in [book](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/developer/architecture/controllers/metadata-propagation.html)).

![Figure 1](./images/in-place-propagation/current-state.png)

With this proposal we are suggesting to improve metadata propagation as described in the following schema:

> ![Figure 2](./images/in-place-propagation/proposed-changes.png)

Reviewer 2: * The line from InfraMachineTemplate to BootstrapConfig shouldn't exist

Reviewer 2: Q: Is there a way to modify those png's going forward? If yes, how? 
(e.g. when we want to include them in our book and then have to modify them over time)

Author: Fixed images, added original pptx

Following paragraphs provide more details about the proposed changes.

#### 1. Label Sync Between Machine and underlying Kubernetes Nodes

As discussed in [Label Sync Between Machine and underlying Kubernetes Nodes](./20220927-label-sync-between-machine-and-nodes.md) we are propagating only
labels with a well-known prefix or a well-known domain from the Machine to the corresponding Kubernetes Node.

#### 2. Labels/Annotations always reconciled

All the labels/annotations previously set only on creation are now going to be always reconciled;
in order to prevent unnecessary rollouts, metadata propagation should happen in-place;
see [in-place propagation](#in-place-propagation) down in this document for more details. 

Note: As of today the topology controller already propagates ClusterClass and Cluster topology metadata changes in-place when possible
in order to avoid unnecessary template rotation with the consequent Machine rollout; we do not foresee changes to this logic.

#### 3. and 4. Set top level labels/annotations for ControlPlane and MachineDeployment created from a ClusterClass

> labels and annotation from ClusterClass and Cluster.topology are going to be propagated to top-level level labels in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Labels and annotations from ClusterClass and Cluster.topology are going to be propagated to top-level level labels and annotations in
```

ControlPlane and MachineDeployment.

> This address [Labels and annotations for MachineDeployments and KubeadmControlPlane created by topology controller](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/7006).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This addresses [Labels and annotations for MachineDeployments and KubeadmControlPlane created by topology controller](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/7006).
```

Note: The proposed solution avoids to add additional metadata fields in ClusterClass and Cluster.topology, but
this has the disadvantage that it is not possible to differentiate top-level labels/annotations from Machines,

> but given the discussion on the above issue this isn't a issue.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
but given the discussion on the above issue this isn't a requirement.
```
(nit: just to avoid repetition of issue, alternatively `a issue` => `an issue`)

installed on it, Kubernetes components included (Kubelet, static pods, CRI etc.).

Implementing in-place propagation has two distinct challenges:

- Current rules defining when MachineDeployments or KubeadmControlPlane trigger a rollout should be modified in order to ignore metadata and
  other fields that are going to be propagated in-place.

- When implementing the reconcile loop that performs in-place propagation, it is required to avoid impact on other components applying
  labels or annotations to the same object. For example, when reconciling labels to a Machine, Cluster API should take care of reconciling
  only the labels it manages, without changing any label applied by the users/by another controller on the same Machine.

#### MachineDeployment rollouts

The MachineDeployment controller determines when a rollout is required using a "semantic equality" comparison between current MachineDeployment
spec and the corresponding MachineSet spec.

While implementing this proposal we should change the definition of "semantic equality" in order to exclude metadata and fields that
should be updated in-place.

> On top of that we should also account the use case where, after deploying the new "semantic equality" rule, there is already one or more

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On top of that we should also account for the use case where, after deploying the new "semantic equality" rule, there is already one or more
```

> MachineSet(s) matching the MachineDeployment. In this case Cluster API deterministically picks the oldest of them.

Reviewer 2: Just to make sure I understood it correctly:

Today: `Cluster API deterministically picks the oldest of them.`

After this proposal is implemented: `pick the "semantically equal" MachineSet with more
Machines`?

If I"m correct maybe let's add "today" to the first statement to make it 100% clear that's the current behavior and not the proposed one.

is used as suffix for the MachineSet name.

Currently the hash is computed using an algorithm that considers the same set of fields used to determine "semantic equality" between current
MachineDeployment spec and the corresponding MachineSet spec.

When exploring the solution for this proposal, we decided above algorithm can be simplified by using a simple random string
plus a check that ensures that the random string is not already taken by an existing MachineSet (for this MachineDeployment).

The main benefit of this change is that we are going to decouple "semantic equality" from computing a UID to be used for identifying Machines
belonging to a MachineSet. Thus making the code easier to understand and simplifying future changes on rollout rules.

#### KCP rollouts

The KCP controller determines when a rollout is required using a "semantic equality" comparison between current KCP
object and the corresponding Machine object.

The "semantic equality" implementation is pretty complex, but for the sake of this proposal only a few detail are relevant:

> - Rollout is triggered if a Machine doesn't ave all the labels and the annotations in spec.machineTemplate.Metadata.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Rollout is triggered if a Machine doesn't have all the labels and the annotations in spec.machineTemplate.Metadata.
```
(same one line below)

Please also note that the current rule does not detect when a label/annotation is removed from spec.machineTemplate.Metadata
and thus users are required to remove labels/annotation manually; this is considered a bug and the new implementation
should account for this use case.

Also, according to the current "semantic equality" rules, changes to nodeDrainTimeout, nodeVolumeDetachTimeout, nodeDeletionTimeout are
applied only to new machines (they don't trigger rollout). While implementing this proposal, we should make sure that
those changes are propagated to existing machines, without triggering rollout.

#### Avoiding conflicts with other components

While doing [in-place propagation](#in-place-propagation), and thus continuously reconciling info from a Kubernetes
object to another we are also reconciling values in a map, like e.g. Labels or Annotations.

This creates some challenges. Assume that:

We want to reconcile following labels form MachineDeployment to Machine:

```yaml
labels:
  a: a 
  b: b
```

After the first reconciliation, the Machine gets above labels.

> Now assume that we remove label `a` from the MachineDeployment; The expected set of labels is 

Reviewer 4: Do you mean remove `b`?
```suggestion
Now assume that we remove label `b` from the MachineDeployment; The expected set of labels is 
```

Reviewer 2: @fabriziopandini Shouldn't this be `b`?

```yaml
labels:
  a: a 
```

> But the machine still have also the label `b`, but we cannot remove it, because at thi stage we do not know

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But the machine still has the label `b`, but we cannot remove it, because at this stage we do not know
```
I think

if this label has been applied by Cluster API or by the user or another controllers.

In order to manage properly this use case, that is co-authored maps, the solution available in API server is
to use [Server Side Apply patches](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply/).

> Based on previous experience in introducing SSA in the topology controller this change require a lot of testing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Based on previous experience in introducing SSA in the topology controller this change requires a lot of testing
```

> and validation. Some cases that should be specifically verified includes:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and validation. Some cases that should be specifically verified include:
```

- introducing SSA patches on an already existing object (and ensure that SSA takes over ownership of managed labels/annotations properly)
- using SSA patches on objects after move or velero backup/restore (and ensure that SSA takes over ownership of managed labels/annotations properly)

However, despite those use case to be verified during implementation, it is assumed that using API server 
build in capabilities is a stronger, long term solution than any other alternative.

## Alternatives

### To not use SSA for [in-place propagation](#in-place-propagation) and be authoritative on labels and annotations

> If Cluster API uses regular patches instead of SSA patches, a a well tested path in Cluster API, Cluster API can

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If Cluster API uses regular patches instead of SSA patches, a well tested path in Cluster API, Cluster API can
```

be implemented in order to be authoritative on label and annotations, that means that all the labels and annotations should
be propagated from higher level objects (e.g. all the Machine's labels should be set on the MachineSet, and going
on up the propagation chain).

This is not considered acceptable, because users and other controller must be capable to apply their own 

> labels to any Kubernetes object, included the one managed by Cluster API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
labels to any Kubernetes object, included the ones managed by Cluster API.
```

the corresponding Machine) and to enforce labels values from higher level objects. 

But, as explained in [avoiding conflicts with other components](#avoiding-conflicts-with-other-components), using
this approach there is no way to determine if label/annotation has been applied by Cluster API or by the user or another controllers,
and thus automatic label/annotation deletion cannot be implemented.

This approach is not considered ideal, because it is transferring the ownership of labels and annotations deletion
to users or other controllers, and this is not considered a nice user experience.

### To not use SSA for [in-place propagation](#in-place-propagation) and use status fields to track labels previously applied by CAPI

If Cluster API uses regular patches instead of SSA patches, without being authoritative, it is possible to implement
a DIY solution for tracking label ownership based on status fields or annotations.

This approach is not considered ideal, because e.g. status field do not survive move/backup and restore, and tacking
a step back, this is sort of re-implementing SSA or a subset of it.

### Change more propagation rules

> While working on the set of changes proposed above a set optional changes to the existing propagation rules has been

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While working on the set of changes proposed above a set of optional changes to the existing propagation rules have been
```

identified; however, considering that the more complex part of this proposal is implementing [in-place propagation](#in-place-propagation),
it was decided to implement only the few, most critical changes to propagation rules. 

Nevertheless we are documenting optional changes dropped from the scope of this iteration for future reference.

![Figure 3](./images/in-place-propagation/optional-changes.png)

Optional changes:

- 4b: Simplify MachineDeployment to MachineSet label propagation
  Leveraging on changed introduced 4, it is possible to simplify MachineDeployment to MachineSet label propagation,
  which currently mimics Deployment to ReplicaSet label propagation. The backside of this chance is that it wouldn't be
  possible anymore to have different labels/annotations on MachineDeployment & MachineSet.

- 5a and 5b: Propagate ClusterClass and Cluster.topology to templates
  This changes make ClusterClass and Cluster.topology labels/annotation to be propagated to templates as well.
  Please note that this change requires further discussions, because
  - Contract with providers should be extended to add optional metadata fields where necessary

>   - It should be defined how to detect if a template for a specif provider has the optional metadata fields,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - It should be defined how to detect if a template for a specific provider has the optional metadata fields,
```

>     and this is tricky because Cluster API doesn't have detailed knowledge of provider's types.

Reviewer 2: If you want, let's also add:
- InfrastructureMachineTemplates are immutable in a lot of providers, so we have to discuss how/if we should be able to mutate the InfrastructureMachineTemplates.spec.template.metadata.
